
.. wxmplot documentation master file

WXMPLOT:  Plotting widgets for wxPython with matplotlib
==================================================================

.. _wxPython: http://www.wxpython.org/
.. _matplotlib:  http://matplotlib.sourceforge.net/

The wxmplot python package provides easy-to-use, richly featured plotting
widgets for `wxPython`_ built on top of the wonderful `matplotlib`_
library.  While matplotlib provides excellent general purpose plotting
functionality, and supports a variety of GUI and non-GUI backends, it does
not have a very tight integration with any particular GUI toolkit.
Similarly, while wxPython has some plotting functionality, it has nothing
as good as matplotlib.  The wxmplot package attempts to bridge this gap,
providing wx.Panels for basic 2D line plots and image display that are
richly featured and provide end-users with interactivity (zooming, reading
positions, rotating images) and customization (line types, labels, marker
type, colors, and color tables) of the graphics without having to know
matplotlib.  Wxmplot does not expose all of matplotlib's capabilities, but
does provide 2D plotting and image display Panels and Frames that are easy
to add to wxPython applications to handle many common plotting and image
display needs.

The wxmplot package is aimed at programmers who want to include high
quality scientific graphics in their applications that can be manipulated
by the end-user.  If you're a python programmer who is comfortable writing
complex pylab scripts or plotting interactively from IPython, this package
may seem too limiting for your needs.  On the other hand, wxmplot provides
better defaults and better customizations than matplotlib's basic
navigation toolbars.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   installation
   plotpanel
   imagepanel
   other
