=======
History
=======

0.8.4 (2018-03-20)
------------------

* Try number two to get comet configuration to load singularity 2.3.2.
  See issue 76 below.

0.8.3 (2018-03-16)
------------------

* Added --dontdeletescratch option to createtrainingmrcstack.py to skip
  deletion of scratchdir. 
  `Issue #78 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/78>`_

* Updated comet configuration to load singularity 2.3.2.
  `Issue #76 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/76>`_

0.8.2 (2017-07-27)
------------------

* Fixed typo in history notes which caused pypi not to render project description properly

0.8.1 (2017-07-27)
------------------

* Fixed bug in createtrainingmrcstack.py which caused program to fail due
  to incorrect call to get_image_path_list(). 
  `Issue #48 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/48>`_

* Increased required memory for merge tasks on Rocce cluster from 10 to
  20 gigabytes of ram and added virtual_free constraint to handle
  gigapixel images.
  `Issue #49 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/49>`_

0.8.0 (2017-06-23)
------------------

* Added --gentifs to createchmjob.py to generate tif probability map images
  `Issue #43 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/43>`_

* Fixed bug in checkchmjob.py --detailed where ram value was incorrect
  `Issue #44 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/44>`_

* Added information about input images to checkchmjob.py --detailed
  `Issue #28 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/28>`_


0.7.0 (2017-06-09)
------------------

* Added --gentiles flag to createchmimage.py to generate tiles from
  image that can be viewed in probability map viewer.
  `Issue #42 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/42>`_

* Added --rawthreshold flag to createprobmapoverlay.py which 
  lets caller specify exact pixel intensity value instead of
  percentage as offered with --threshpc.
  `Issue #41 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/41>`_

* Added virtual_free to requirements for SGE jobs submitted
  by createchmtrainjob.py to rocce cluster. 
  `Issue #40 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/40>`_

0.6.0 (2017-03-03)
------------------

* Added --detailed option to checkchmjob.py. 
  `Issue #6 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/6>`_

* Added --addprobmap to createprobmapoverlay.py to enable
  additional probability maps to be overlayed. 
  `Issue #25 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/25>`_

* Added createchmtrainjob.py script that creates a CHM
  train job. 
  `Issue #19 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/19>`_

* Fixed incorrect script names in readme.txt generated by
  createchmjob.py. 
  `Issue #20 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/20>`_

0.5.1 (2017-01-12)
------------------

* Fixed account not being put into runjobs.gordon and runmerge.gordon.
  `Issue #11 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/11>`_

* Fixed errors in checking job status examples in readme.txt 
  created by createchmjob.py.
  `Issue #12 <https://github.com/CRBS/chmutil/issues/12>`_

0.5.0 (2017-01-11)
------------------

* First release on PyPI.

